---
permalink: /dln/
title: "Digital Literacy Narrative"
---

As a junior at **NYUAD** studying *Interactive Media* with minors in *Environmental Studies* and *Art History*, I found the class very enjoyable. This semester, I took an introductory digital humanities course to deepen my knowledge in this field and develop new digital skills. Coming then, I opened a new sphere of interest, something I never heard about before and never thought of learning as a separate chapter.  I've been particularly adept at leveraging these tools to enhance my understanding of complex narratives and visual data, applying these insights to both academic projects and personal interests. 

When I first signed up for the digital humanities course, I wasn't sure what to expect and didn't fully understand what it was about. But the class went beyond my expectations in a really positive way.  This class helped me see how technology can make sense of information in new and exciting ways, giving me inspiration to keep using these skills in future projects.

> As I delve deeper into my studies of digital humanities, the convergence of technology and storytelling emerges as a captivating focal point. Initially, I perceived this domain as primarily concerned with written narratives, confined within the boundaries of letters and sentences. However, through a series of workshops featuring diverse tools and methodologies, my perspective has expanded exponentially.

Before exploring the intricacies of digital humanities, I had already honed my skills in several fields, each providing me with a distinct lens through which to view the digital landscape. Being an interactive technology researcher, I learned creative user-centered design principles and interactive storytelling techniques, often utilizing tools like **Unity** and **Javascript** to bring my visions to life. My passion for environmental studies has equipped me with a keen awareness of data analysis and visualization techniques, crucial skills in understanding and addressing complex environmental challenges. Likewise, my exploration of art history has instilled in me an appreciation for the intersection of technology and creativity throughout history, from the earliest cave paintings to contemporary digital art installations.
However, my foray into digital humanities has illuminated new pathways for exploration and collaboration across disciplines. Through collaborative projects and discussions, I’ve learned the ethical implications of AI and data usage within my respective fields of study. Also, I’ve grappled with questions surrounding the ethical responsibilities of AI developers and the impact of AI-generated content on storytelling.

For instance, the exploration of *Sufi* art revealed profound layers of meaning behind intricate calligraphies, illuminating their significance within the Islamic world. Prior to this encounter, I had never delved into the depths of these artworks, unaware of the rich narratives woven into their very strokes. This revelation underscored the multidimensionality of storytelling within digital humanities, transcending traditional notions of textual narrative.

Moreover, for me , digital mapping in apps like *Kepler* emerged as a cognitive process extending far beyond mere cartography. Through the lens of GIS science, I learned to perceive mapping as a dynamic tool for ordering and interpreting the world. Beyond simple spatial representation, digital mapping facilitates complex analyses and insights, enriching our understanding of geographic phenomena.

Similarly, the importance of data organization learned from the cople of class readings became useful as I navigated through various assignments. Learning to efficiently structure and manage data proved essential for conducting meaningful analyses and uncovering actionable insights. This skill,underscores the critical role of organization in unlocking and accesing the potential of digital information. For exampler, proper naming of things is a key to the best results of the data analysis. 

Another platform we explored was *Voyant Tools*, a web-based text analysis platform. *Voyant Tools'* greatest strength lies in its ability to generate visualizations that make it easy to detect linguistic patterns and shifts across various texts.By analyzing word frequency, context, and co-occurrence, I was able to trace how Austen's writing style evolved over time. However, Voyant can struggle with abstract or ambiguous texts where meaning relies heavily on context and subtext. For such texts, its analysis is less straightforward, requiring more effort in interpretation.

Orange Data Mining emerged as another essential platform, specifically for analyzing imagery and visual storytelling. I used Orange to analyze patterns in color and composition for my final project in art history class, which focused on the theme of isolation in interiors through the works of *Vilhelm Hammershøi and Edward Hopper*. The two artists portrayed isolation with unique blends of color schemes, lighting, and shapes. While Hammershøi conveyed loneliness through muted tones and minimalistic compositions, Hopper relied on contrasting light and shadow to create a starker sense of detachment and melancholy.

> To deepen our understanding of how computers interpret complex visual data, from class materials I got the insights from Fei Fei Li’s TED Talk, *"How we teach computers to understand pictures."* 

Fei Fei Li emphasized the challenges that advanced machines face in interpreting visual content. Despite the technological advancements allowing machines to perform complex tasks such as driving cars autonomously, they struggle to differentiate between simple visual elements without sophisticated vision capabilities. Fei Fei Li’s work with the ImageNet project has significantly contributed to the training of computer algorithms to recognize and interpret images with much greater accuracy. Her approach to teaching computers to see, by using massive datasets and deep learning, particularly convolutional neural networks, has revolutionized how machines interpret images.

In tandem with these practical skills, my exploration of digital humanities introduced me to new terminology and concepts. Through Drucker's *The Digital Humanities Coursebook*, I encountered terms such as **tokenization** and **data mining**, each offering insights into the automated analysis of digital content. Tokenization, as discussed in *Chapter 2*, unveiled the process of breaking down text into meaningful units, while data mining, mentioned in *Chapter 7*, illuminated the extraction of patterns and insights from digital files.This process typically involves algorithms and computational techniques to sift through large datasets and extract valuable information. In the context of digital humanities, data mining can be used to uncover hidden connections within texts, visualize patterns in historical data, or analyze trends in cultural artifacts.

My background in interactive media and art history has fueled my fascination with narrative techniques and visual storytelling, and I am eager to explore how digital tools and platforms can enhance and redefine traditional modes of storytelling. I started to be really interested in the power of words, styles of writing and the language of the writers. But with the knowledge gained from this class, I opened myself a new way of viewing everything, a way of analyzing text not only by its meaning, but also by its symbols.
In assignment 1, I had the opportunity to scroll through the digital collections of the **Harvard Art Museum**. Beyond completing the task at hand, this experience provided a gateway to exploring lesser-known works by renowned artists such as **Renoir**. Delving into the sketches of these artists, often overshadowed by their more prominent masterpieces, offered a fresh perspective on their creative processes and artistic evolution. This newfound knowledge not only enriched my understanding of art history but also broadened my appreciation for the diverse facets of artistic expression.

What made this experience particularly invigorating for me is the opportunity to engage with a diverse cohort of classmates, each bringing their own unique blend of expertise and perspectives to the table. Working on **Unproject** was probably one of the best highlights of my semester. 
I believe I could improve my geocoding skills, practiced in Assignment 3, as that task proved challenging for me. With more practice, I aim to become more proficient in this area.

> From leveraging data analytics to track and mitigate environmental impacts to using digital storytelling to raise awareness and inspire action, I see immense potential for interdisciplinary collaboration to drive positive change in the world. 

Through this journey, I learned not just how to analyze data but also to connect it with broader ethical concerns, especially with AI-generated content. The ethical responsibilities of developers and the impact of AI on storytelling remain significant considerations. Tools like Voyant and Orange allow us to unlock previously hidden stories, but we need to ensure these narratives are accurate, ethical, and inclusive.

My journey through digital humanities has been transformative, challenging me to expand my horizons and rethink the ways technology and humanities intersect. Whether it's analyzing the impact of AI, organizing data to reveal hidden narratives, or collaborating across disciplines to tackle environmental challenges, this field offers endless opportunities for growth. In the age of AI, I’m confident that my experiences in digital humanities will empower me to navigate the challenges and opportunities ahead.


